Wreck of the "Thora", Anglesey
Condition Report - December 2019
Crawford Currie

This report describes a visit to a wreck presumed to be the "Thora" in late December 2019. A survey of this wreck was carried out in 2014 (report available from Gwynedd council or MADU). Due to lack of resources on this occasion, only a visual examination, including photographs, site sketches, and general measurements, was undertaken.

General Description of Site

The wreck is to be found at the east end of the Anglesey to Holy Island causeway (the Cob) on the beach next to the road. The wreck is entirely submerged at high tide, but is accessible from HW (Holyhead) +2 until HW-2. The wreck is oriented on an approximately N-S line (190) with the bow just below the high water mark. It lies on sand, gravel, and cobbles, and is thickly covered in seaweed, mostly bladderwrack [Fucus vesiculosus], serrated wrack [Fucus serratus] and Irish Moss/Carragheen [Chondrus crispus].

Description of the Wreck

A pair of detached long timbers lie along the approximate keel line of the wreck, providing a convenient baseline. On either side of this timber a number of the futtocks rise clear of the sand. Only the first 14m of the vessel are visible on the surface, with the remainder presumably salvaged or lost due to weather action. Salvage seems likely, as several home owners in the area claim to have roof frames made from her timbers. Two sections of the port frames still carry the remains of hull planking. A further piece of 4 planks lie in the area of the bow.

 Approximately 13m behind the described wreck lies what appears to be the sternpost, with metal gudgeons attached.

A comparison with photographs taken during the 2014 survey suggests that there was been little major deterioration in the condition of the wreck since then. Several of the frames are reduced to little more than sticks above the surface. Excavation would be required to inspect the timbers below the sand surface, which was beyond the scope of this inspection.
